[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> The current system has to go
through a collapse unless you
believe that infinite growth
is possible on a finite planet.
The system is growth dependent.
So there's going
to be a collapse
in one form or another.
>> If you just look at
what's happening in terms
of deforestation, resource
overconsumption, waste streams,
and climate change, I mean
these are all phenomena that are
brought about by
our overconsumption,
overexploitation of resources.
We have to leave 80% at
least of the fossil fuel
that we know about
and that we know
we could make money digging up.
We have to leave it in the
ground for the entire century
at least.
>> The ecological crisis
comes from treating the earth
as an other, as just
a bunch of stuff.
>> We've been so powerful.
And we've impacted on so much
of the wild world around us
that if we don't do
something fairly soon,
the wild world is
going to consume us.
>> These are the massive
issues-- climate change,
energy, and food, all of these
things that are converging
on us.
And yet you pick up
the paper every day
and there'll be nothing
about this stuff.
>> If you look at our
global economic system,
I guess you'd have to first
think of it as a system
by accident.
Nobody sat down and
designed this thing.
And in a lot of ways,
it's sort of the worst
of all possible
combinations because what
you have is something
that is supposed
to be based in the real
world but behaves as
if it were in a fantasy world.
>> That's really
exploitative, extractive,
damaging not only to people
but to the environment
and to the economy too.
I think we're heading
for some very deep water
if we don't make these changes.
>> Being sustainable is not
just a nice thing to do.
Being unsustainable isn't
just a bit unfortunate.
It is an existential
threat to our species.
People don't seem to get that
we actually need to do something
about it or we're gone.
>> You've probably had those
moments of despair where you
think it's just hopeless, and
the world is always going to be
this way, and anything
we do is not enough.
But there's also--
I would say that this is
maybe more of a heart knowing
that understands that a more
beautiful world is possible.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
The world is built on stories
or even a story in mythology.
Every culture has
a mythology that
answers the deep
questions like who am
I, what is a self, what's real?
How does change happen?
What's the nature of reality?
Every culture answers
that in a different way.
And the answers that
our culture has--
and when I say our culture,
I mean the dominant culture
of this planet.
The answers that have worked
and guided our culture
for several hundred years now,
and, to some extent, thousands
of years, aren't
working anymore.
We're facing a crisis
in our basic way
of making meaning about the
world and our understanding
of the recipe for living life.
Like all of these things
are in a state of crisis.
>> The problems that we face
in terms of environmental
condition, degradation,
overconsumption of resources,
a lot of social justice problems
really pretty much all stem
from a common cause
and that's economics.
The biggest problem it
has right now for us,
the biggest implication it
has for humans and pretty much
everything else
on the planet, is
that it's causing a lot
of unsustainable growth.
It's causing growth to
accelerate in a way that cannot
be met by the natural resources
or sinks on the planet we
inhabit.
>> The money system
demands endless growth.
It compels endless growth.
It encourages endless growth.
So in other words, it encourages
the conversion of nature
into property, into products.
Now the problem with
this growth, of course,
is that if the economy keeps
growing, sooner or later
it needs natural resources
to support that growth.
>> One of the big flaws in
the current money system is
interest.
We would probably only need
to work half of the hours
that we do and still
be able to maintain
the same standard of living
if it wasn't for interest.
Interest is hidden
in so many ways--
the price of any
goods and services.
Most businesses have loans on
which they are paying interest.
And they don't pay interest.
You do.
I do.
And so that means that we have
to work, and work, and work,
and exploit mother nature
as well in the process way
more than would be necessary
if it wasn't for interest.
>> For a lot of the
things to keep running,
to keep the finance engine
ticking along and keep
economies moving, we have to
have lots and lots of energy.
Energy for extracting
natural resources, energy
for shipping things
around the world,
energy for manufacturing,
energy to promote them,
energy to keep them going,
energy to maintain things.
So it's a lot of energy
used in the system.
>> Fossil fuel energy is energy
from the sun that's being
stored in plants or other living
things and has been stored
under the ground usually for
millions and millions of years.
When you dig it up, you
get a free bonus basically.
You get this amazing
wealth of energy
which you can do all kinds of
creative and amazing things
with.
But the problem is is that
when it runs out, that's it.
It's gone.
The other aspect
of that, of course,
is the process of getting
it and digging it up
is both destructive
and also expensive
and requires energy to do.
>> Peak oil is a concept
that is quite simple.
What it means is that you have
a finite amount of something.
And if you consume
it at a steady rate,
then there isn't a peak.
You just consume it.
But if you consume it
with an increasing rate,
then you'll hit a point where
you can't increase anymore.
And that would be a peak.
And then the consumption
would necessarily
drop off in some way.
>> The energy return on
investment from fossil fuels
when we first discovered
it was so big.
And that's why we have the
abundance that we have now
is just that free energy.
And we've been having this
crazy party for 100 years now
on fossil fuels.
It's just a crazy binge
that we've been on.
And we're at the
end of the binge
now because the energy
return on investment
is dwindling all the time.
It's how our food system works.
We talk about this
green revolution
that feed all these people but
it's not a green revolution.
It's an oil revolution.
>> The entire system is hugely
dependent on fossil fuel
inputs.
You pull those out
and I guarantee you
within days the whole thing
is going to fall down.
>> If you take into account
fossil fuels and the transport,
the tilling, everything,
the packaging, the movement,
the whole food system that we
have in the so-called developed
world, then there's at least 10
units of energy for every one
we get out of it.
>> Basing a food production
system that's meant to feed
the world on something which
is temporary brings obvious
problems.
As a result of that, is the
huge loss of biodiversity.
And while not a
lot of people care
about bugs and all
this other stuff,
biodiversity is critical.
So when you strip that
away by having what
we call monocultures, then
you get massive problems.
With monocultures, we are
talking about growing one crop,
or farming one animal, and
you don't see that in nature.
Nature doesn't work that way.
It's evolved diversity
for resilience.
When you take that away, these
systems become really brittle.
And they're very
prone to breaking.
Now we kind of stave off
the worst of those effects.
But we try to with
fossil fuel inputs.
We put in fertilizers.
We put in herbicides,
fungicides, pesticides.
We go to great lengths to try
and protect these very fragile
food production systems.
I think what a lot
of people don't
realize is that our food system
is incredibly vulnerable.
We do a pretty good
job most of the time
of getting food
where it needs to go,
managing supplies, managing
surplus transportation,
all that sort of stuff.
But it is quite vulnerable
to major upsets,
all kinds of crises,
particularly economic crises.
If the shops, the
supermarkets stop
selling food for three
days for some reason,
how would you survive?
What would that be like?
How would that feel?
What would you do?
You know, it's happened to me
in a major city just one day
and it really made me think.
You begin to realize that there
is a series of things which all
need to be in place and all
need to be functioning properly
all the time for
things to run smoothly.
In a world of increasing
climate volatility
and the economic pressures
that that can bring,
it's really easy to see how a
bad situation could develop.
>> So this is the
kind of scary reality.
And it's coming fast.
And unless we really, really
quickly change our food system
and how we do it,
then there's going
to be huge impacts on humans
let alone the other animals
on the planet.
>> To a certain extent, people
who really do understand
the problem of climate change,
and resources, and equity,
it's really easy to get focused
on the miracle technology
solution to that, because
that's what we do.
That's what society
is asking us to do.
>> I think if technology
could have solved all
of our problems, then it
would have already solved all
of our problems.
Theoretically, we have
all the technology
we need to live beautifully
on earth and beautifully
with each other.
But we have not
lived beautifully
on earth beautifully
with each other
so something else has to happen.
>> 100 years from now, every
solar panel we build will be
rubbish.
It will be toxic waste,
in fact, somewhere.
I hope somebody figures
out what to do with it.
Every windmill we build now
won't be running anymore.
Hopefully, a lot of
it'll be recycled.
I don't know.
But the carbon we put in
there will still be there.
You're never going to have
air travel with renewables.
steel with renewables.
You're never going to have
electronics with renewables,
because you need diesel.
So making sure that you
leave some diesel for later
is kind of important.
I'm not disillusioned with
solar, or wind, or anything.
I know that the substitution of
those things for fossil fuels
isn't possible.
So as long as we keep telling
ourselves the story that it is,
we aren't actually doing
the thing we have to do,
which is to just leave the
stuff in the ground, which
means what?
There's only one
thing you can do then,
which is to use less of it.
If there's an
industrial civilization
out there a couple
centuries from now,
then they're using fossil fuel.
Tiny amounts of it.
And they're using
renewable energy.
And that renewable
energy they are using
is hydro and geothermal.
And wood that they are
harvesting and husbanding
very, very carefully.
All right.
And what we notice
most about them
is how little they're
using of most everything.
That's what has to happen.
It doesn't matter how
many solar panels you ever
put on anything.
The only thing that matters is
leaving the coal in the ground,
leaving the oil in
the ground, leaving
the gas in the
ground, all of it,
and planting back every bit of
forest that you possibly can.
That's the only
thing that matters.
>> The history of civilization
has been kind of like a history
of an increasing power to
dominate and control the other,
the cultural other and
also the natural other.
[DRAMATIC MUSIC]
And this was supposed
to bring us into utopia.
We were supposed
to live in paradise
by now, a paradise of
electrified comfort,
robot servants, space
colonies, artificial food,
infinite lifespans,
et cetera, et cetera.
The breakdown that's
happening today in part
is happening because this
glorious promise of technology
and also social engineering
was never fulfilled.
And in fact, things are
getting worse and worse.
And in fact, our
technologies of control
now look to be seeding
power destruction,
the breakdown of the ecological
basis of civilization.
We don't know anymore
what the answer is.
We don't know who we are.
We don't even know what's
real, because on every level,
the story that answered those
questions is breaking down
politically, economically,
and especially technologically
and in our
relationship to nature.
So that leaves us not knowing.
And it leaves us open
to another story.
>> If we want to solve health
crisis, food quality issues,
economic issues, we really
have to change the system
and the infrastructure
of the system.
And we have to create
our own infrastructure.
I've been studying sustainable
farming systems for over 25
years.
There are no real issues.
We can solve all of them.
There are really easy
answers to grow food quality
and do that with good
environmental care.
That's the easy bit.
We are in a position to do it
properly because of the CSA.
Our members allow us to
create that diversity.
That other old
system doesn't allow
you to create that diversity.
>> CSA stands for community
supported agriculture.
It means that a farmer starts
growing food and growing food,
there's a lot of
unknowns in there.
And you have to start at
the beginning of the season.
And you don't know,
for whatever reason,
if you're going to harvest
all the things that you
plan to harvest that you
started sowing months back.
So the idea is that
a group of people
support the farmer so the
farmer knows he's got an outlet.
And the members
that we have, they
know that every
week they're going
to get a box of
healthy fresh foods
that have been harvested
just before they got them.
For us, it means we have
stability in effect,
that the plants we sow,
that they are sold.
We don't have the
issue of food waste
because if a broccoli
is small and it normally
wouldn't be able to
go to the supermarket,
we can get people too.
>> As a farmer, you want
to create healthy soils,
and healthy plants,
and healthy animals.
And further up the
food chain, you
make sure that you create
the soil that invites
the right sets of microbes.
That for us means we have soil,
which is the mineral component.
In the soil, we've
got the microorganisms
which are governing the system.
We just create a
habitat for them.
Then you got the plants
growing out of there,
be it annuals,
perennials, and trees.
Then amongst that, you've got
the insects living in there
and then we've incorporated
pigs, sheep, cows, ducks,
geese, and, I'm sure, we're
forgetting a few bits and bobs.
And every single
item adds value.
>> So on the closed
loop systems,
they will have tree crops,
and all that nuts, fruit,
all that kind of thing happening
on the fringes or in shelter
belts, a whole really diverse
approach to farming that is way
more sustainable but also
closes that nitrogen or that
fertilizer loop so you don't
have to bring it in from
the outside.
You just don't waste it.
>> While eating less meat is a
really important thing to do,
it's important to recognize
that you can't have a healthy
ecosystem without animals.
A truly environmentally friendly
and ecologically healthy
food production system
must have animals,
because as soon as you take
animals out of that system,
all the jobs that those
animals did in that functioning
ecosystem now needs to
be done some other way,
whether that's by
people or chemicals.
The health of these
food production systems
is supported by the natural
and healthy interaction
between plants and animals.
And that can take the form of
pest control, fertility cycles.
There's lots of interactions
between animals and plants,
which we can and should use to
support a healthy and resilient
food production system.
So really what that boils down
to is we need to eat less meat.
We don't cut it out.
But the best thing
that anyone can do
is try and find producers that
are operating systems which
are looking after the health
of their environment, including
the animals, and
supporting them.
>> What comes out the back end
of a worm is really good stuff.
And then it's just
really cool just seeing
this hyphae of fungus,
and they're just growing
on the surface of the soil.
So holistic grazing is
a management technique
that's been devised by a
Zimbabwean man, Allan Savory.
And he was observing the large
herds of Buffalo in Africa,
and there could be bison in
America and just massive herds
of ruminant animals.
And these animals were
constantly on the move
because there's generally
some lions or something
just on their back and
wanting to pick off
any of the weak ones.
We have large mobs of cattle
that are shifted every day.
But instead of lions keeping
them bunched together,
we have electric fences.
And each day they're
going onto fresh grass.
And it's long grass.
And so they're
not eating it all.
Some of it is getting trampled
and with the dung and urine
and that, that's just
all forming that kind
of compost heap on the ground.
Other farmers might
be looking at us
and say, well, you're just
wasting all that grass
because it gets dry, and
stocky, and what have you.
But my reply is that
waste is a human concept.
Nature doesn't do waste.
And so we're using that pasture
as part of our first fertilizer
program because that's what's
getting put down on the soil,
and broken down, and going
back into building soil.
When the grass is grazed under
the holistic long grazing
system, it gets cut off
short by the animal.
And it also sheds its
roots at that time.
And that's what is releasing
carbon into the soil.
And I guess one of the
most exciting things
and drivers of what we're doing
is the potential that that has
for helping with
climate change issues.
Some of those CAFOs
that they call
them the miracle or the feedlot,
cattle fattening operations
are a climate disaster.
But again, under
this system, they
are sequestering
more carbon and are
part of a natural cycle
that is actually beneficial.
Conventionally,
farmers, it's all
about keeping the grass
short in a vegetative state
so it's growing vigorously.
And that system
works while you're
putting on lots of imported
fertilizers, particularly
phosphate fertilizers,
largely from North Africa,
and a whole system that requires
digging up that fertilizer,
and trucking it, and
then shipping it,
and then trucking it, and then
processing it, and then flying
it.
On the whole, it's a system
that's not going to work
and a future with
less fossil fuels.
What we're doing
on the farm here
is trying to reduce the
amount of fossil fuels
that it takes to produce food.
We've got the
cattle going around.
We have hens following
along behind the cattle.
There's these pigs
on this farm too.
And we're milking
a few dairy cows.
And all that is really
about using a perennial crop
like grass pasture with
forage from trees and that
around as well so we can produce
eggs from the chooks and pork
without relying on so
much of the annual grains
and all the energy that's
involved in producing them.
So just trying to get the fossil
fuels out of our food system
as much as we can and producing
healthy, natural food.
>> The powerful thing is that
with regenerative agriculture,
we can not only produce food
and we can not only produce
an abundance of food, but we can
do it in a way that regenerates
the land, that
replenishes the aquifers,
that sequesters carbon,
that nurtures and supports
biodiversity.
Regenerative agriculture,
permaculture,
holistic management-- there is
nothing magical about the way
that these things work.
It's all based
upon sound science
and about having a
point of view that
is looking at your
ecosystem in its entirety,
not just individual
aspects of it.
So really what
this breaks down to
is that anyone who's
looking after land,
whether you're a
farmer, or a gardener,
whatever, you're an
ecosystem manager.
- My philosophy about
what to do in the world
isn't go to a pristine
area, and live there,
and enjoy your life.
It's to find a place that's
degraded and fix it up.
>> 23 years ago, we started
developing the food forest
system here.
We've got 80 different species
of plants at last count.
Then that doesn't include the
80 different types of apples
and the 60 different
types of gooseberries.
And that's lovely to
have that diversity.
And it means that every time
of the year there's thing's
flowering, things giving
fruit, crops you can eat.
And so having
diversity is special.
And that's what makes a
forest garden resilient.
This property had been
abandoned for probably 40 years.
No one lived here.
And an old house had
burnt down on the spot.
>> In the top area, this area
where the house is now was
completely covered in junk and
the remains of the old house.
Most people would
have not even crossed
the threshold of
the property to have
a look at that I don't
think, because it
didn't look very appealing.
But to us, it did, because I
thought, well, for one thing,
nobody wants it so it's
probably going to be cheap,
and it was cheap to buy.
And secondly, I
thought I can fix this.
A food forest is a
permanent planting.
So you want to set up
just like a forest system.
So a forest system can be
the always the big trees,
and the little size trees, the
bottom layer, the ground layer.
They work together.
Some plants collect up some
minerals and give others back.
And the other one
does something else.
Growing out in the forest
garden there, aside
from the native
trees which I've used
as a framework or a platform
for building everything else--
and those provide me with
shelter from the wind
and also nest sites
for the birds.
And the birds are a
really important player
in the management of the
garden and the cocoa,
the cabbage trees that
I've got growing there,
starlings nest in
almost all of them.
And those starlings, as
they're feeding their youngers,
their babies are
flying out and finding
any soft-bodied
caterpillar or grub
they can so there's
our pest management
for that kind of thing.
And then as an understory or
the second layer down to that,
we have our fruit tree layer,
which is our heritage apples,
and pears, and plums, and
, nectarines and peaches,
apricots.
And then below that a
layer of berry fruits,
and currants, red currants,
black currants, white currants,
gooseberries,
worcesterberries, all
of those sorts of
shrubby plants that
like to grow in the semishade.
And then wrapping
around all of that
are the biennial and
perennial herbs, some of which
are edible, some of
which are medicinal.
And then below that there
are bulbs and root crops
that grow, such as
parsnips, and wild carrots,
those kinds of things.
And then winding their way
up through these things
are vines like grape
vines, and kiwi fruit,
and Manchurian gooseberries,
and hops, and all
sorts of things which kind
of bind everything together
and tie the forest together.
>> It's so peaceful
when you walk about.
And it's just the all
different flowers,
and the energy and action.
All the insects and the
birds have their own life.
And so the birds are doing all
their thing up in the trees
and coming down to feeding.
And insects are flying
around, and having babies,
and flying off on missions.
It's like being in
another universe really.
It's just amazing.
And it's, to me,
it's how life should
be with that livingness and
the interconnectedness of all
the plants, and
bees, and the herbs.
>> In a forest garden like ours,
the major player is wildness,
is the natural world and all
of those things that happen
in there.
And my job is just
to kind of mold
that to suit our purposes
to a certain extent.
We are not separate
from the wild world.
We are as wild as it is.
But we've worked
towards a form that
is not fitting in with the
wild world at all well.
And it's going to realign
us fairly soon, in my view,
unless we can recognize that
we need to be fully integrated
into that world.
>> People in
indigenous societies,
in tribal societies or
in agrarian villages,
they were enmeshed in a matrix
of relationship that gave them
a strong identity.
Everybody who they
saw on a daily basis
knew them really well.
And we also were in intimate
connection with the land.
We knew every plant.
We knew every animal.
Every bird we knew its
song, and when it sang,
and what bugs it ate, and
where those bugs lived,
and what the soil smells
like where the bugs live,
and what plants grow there,
and what medicine the plants
were used for.
We were in this
web of interbeing.
We felt as if we were
at home in the universe.
That is missing in
our current society.
We're surrounded by a
sea of strangers, people
that we know only very
superficially if at all.
For our people, the
ancestors and the land
are all part of one.
We come from the land.
And most people,
humans on the planet,
relate to land
one way or another
because they belong to it.
And they force their own
identity out of it as well.
And that will always
continue to happen.
It's like a biological bond
between a mother and a child.
You can't break it.
That bond is enforced when the
genealogy of the ancestors,
of their families, grandparents
is emotionally installed
in that person, that they
feel that they belong here.
>> Interbeing is a
very natural term.
It means more than
interconnection
or interdependency, which kind
of suggests separate selves
having relationships.
Interbeing is more
of an understanding
that we are relationship, that
my very existence depends,
or draws from, or
includes your existence.
My well-being is intimately
connected to your well-being
or to the well-being of the
river, the ocean, forest,
people across the world, and
so forth, because I'm not
really separate from you.
And that means that in
the story of interbeing,
I know that whatever
I do to the world
will come back to me somehow.
So if our true being is the
totality of our relationships
and includes everything
in the cosmos,
if we are truly maybe
a holographic mirror
of all that is, then
when we cut ourselves off
from any aspect of nature,
other people, we create a wound.
We create a cut off.
And this is painful.
And we yearn to
recover our wholeness.
However, due to ideology, due to
the economic system that we're
immersed in, due to
cultural factors,
due to many, many, many reasons,
the reunion that we long for
is unavailable to us.
That is good for business,
because it drives consumerism.
It drives inquisitiveness.
It drives greed.
It drives all kinds
of neurotic behaviors
that seek to compensate for
the missing relationships.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I felt myself being drawn
into this materialistic world
because all the people that
were around me had material
possessions.
And it was all-- there was
this wanting and creating
of attachment and wanting
and wanting more stuff.
So I sort of got swept
into that in a way.
So yeah, I studied business.
And I was involved in finance
and more specifically,
the stock market.
So we used to help people
manage their money.
And one of the
organizations I worked with,
we used to manage hundreds of
millions of dollars for people.
I wasn't from that background,
from a conservative sort
of upbringing.
Then all of a
sudden, I'm involved
with guys that are
driving luxury cars
and living in expensive
houses in Sydney's suburbs.
It's sort of a bit overwhelming.
A lot of the guys
that I'd work with,
they were multimillionaires.
But $20 million wasn't enough.
So they have to
have the three cars.
They have to have
a holiday home.
They have to have a boat.
And what happens is you can
get trapped in that lifestyle.
So the idea is to have native
plants mixed among fruit trees.
So we've got natives here.
We've got a tamarillo here.
We've got manuka and kanuka
and [INAUDIBLE] natives.
We've got a cabbage tree here.
This is a pine nut.
So those are real expensive
nuts you get in a supermarket.
This is one of those.
It takes about 10 years to get
any fruit on it or any nuts,
so that's a long-term project.
And then over here
we've got a fig tree,
which is fruiting quite nicely.
And then-- oh, for the
monarch butterflies,
we've got a couple of swan
plants, which they really
enjoy.
And we might be
lucky to see one.
Here he comes now.
It was only after Beth, my
wife, and I made the move
to New Zealand--
we just had enough
of the whole corporate life,
and we wanted a slower, simpler
lifestyle.
It was then the realization
sort of hit home.
I started to research more,
read hundreds of articles
and watched hundreds
of documentaries
and all sorts of stuff.
Then I started to
really understand, wow,
we've got some
serious issues here,
and no one's really
talking about this stuff.
And it's quite scary.
I guess with realization
of some of the broader
issues such as climate
change, peak oil or resource
depletion, and the
extinction crisis
we're currently going
through-- and it's
sort of like these
massive issues are
being given lip service by
governments and organizations.
It's like, oh, it'll
just won't happen.
Or the system will
solve this problem.
And that's what it
sort of feels like.
So I guess that brings
up a lot of emotions,
like frustration
and anger and guilt.
And it's like, why isn't someone
doing something about this?
Here we go.
Here's a strawberry.
So this is a nice one.
Look at the color on it thing.
Then I started to
research permaculture
and realized that
it was an integrated
approach to how we're living.
So at the moment,
our current society--
it's a fragmented
approach to living.
So everything's
compartmentalized or separated.
Whereas permaculture
is a holistic approach
to how we're living.
It integrates food, environment
with your lifestyle and taking
care of people, the planet,
and the natural resources.
So a lot of people come
over to our property
and have a look around.
And they go, what
about your fruit trees?
Do you get pests and
stuff like birds?
And I say, yeah, sure.
But we don't mind that.
They were here first, and
we're a part of nature.
And we've had comments from
other people that live around
near us on the farms.
And they say they can't believe
how much wildlife and bird
life is here.
And their properties just
a few hundred meters away
have almost no
wildlife or bird life.
So we're attracting
bird life and wildlife
through just letting
nature be as opposed
to wanting to control it.
Permaculture links
into other aspects
like collaboration,
localization, food resiliency,
and networking.
So it's not just
about growing food.
It's about connecting
a whole system
and integrating a whole
system into one's life.
This lifestyle working on the
land and doing permaculture
feels more rewarding and like
I'm putting something back.
We also live a less
consumerist lifestyle,
so we don't need as much stuff.
So I haven't got
this constant craving
for more and more things to
make me feel satisfied or happy.
So there you have it.
We have homegrown salad--
fruit salad and green salad--
and some eggs.
And I can't believe
still that I don't
have to go to a supermarket.
We've grown all this
ourselves in just three years.
I'm still amazed.
So anyone can do it.
When I was living
in big cities, it
was like I had to get away
to connect with nature.
But when I wake up every
morning, I come outside,
and I'm immediately
in nature here.
I don't have that void anymore.
I've just got this instant
connection and satisfaction.
It's hard to explain.
>> Maybe you've had
this experience,
feeling like I'm
not living my life.
I'm living the life
I'm paid to live.
But what about my life?
So this is a different
dimension of human nature
that we need to invoke,
we need to implement.
We need to create conditions
for that part of human nature
to blossom.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We had been
living in Katikati,
and I was working a regular job
as a GP in the practice there.
And then I just found
these kind of warning signs
that I was starting
to get out of balance.
I'd be lovely with my
patients, but I'd come home
and be kind of shitty.
I was feeling quite depressed.
Just kind of the internal
cogs weren't running together
very well.
And we started talking about
it and thought, well, maybe we
really need to kind of radically
rethink how we want to live.
So the house is
20 square meters.
It started with a sheep
shearer's quarters
just to the side of us
here, and that was maybe
20 years ago that
that was built.
So our bedroom is
the original cabin.
And then this L-shaped space is
our kitchen, lounge, library,
office, day bed.
>> Everything.
>> Everything, yeah.
20 square meters.
We've got a shower just
adjoining and a bit of a deck
out the back.
A few months ago,
a friend of mine
helped me put a 300-watt
panel up on the roof.
And so that powers the broadband
and telephone and a bit
more light.
What else?
Now we can--
>> Use the sewing machine,
which is very exciting.
>> Yeah, the sewing
machine is good.
A lot of people, when
they hear about it, they--
oh my gosh, how is
that with a baby?
And even before that, how
is that just the two of you?
>> I think actually it's great
with a baby living in a small
space in that wherever she
is, she's never that far away.
So it's quite easy
to be doing whatever
I need to be doing and
keeping an eye on her.
And when she's sleeping,
she'll be close by.
>> We have--
I don't know the term for it,
like a work-trade arrangement
with the owners.
And we've been living
here just over a year.
So about three or four days
a week, I'm on the farm.
And then part time
I work as a GP.
So our costs are fractional to
what they were living in town.
I don't have any stress about
money, which is a huge benefit.
Emotionally I'm healthier.
>> It was a choice wanting to be
more immersed in my environment
and more directly
connected with my needs,
where my food was coming from.
And I love going out and
seeing the garden each day
and seeing how
things have changed.
And yeah, it's like having
a relationship with a living
thing, lots of living things.
>> Regularly tending
in the garden,
I had this feeling of almost
being in love with the garden,
which blew me away.
>> The future of humanity is
to return to that relationship
to nature and to all beings
and all human beings too,
to fall in love with the world.
Its well-being is my well-being.
If we really were in
love with the planet
and incorporated that love
into all of our systems,
into our money system, we would
not have an ecological crisis.
>> If an economy is operating
outside of ecological limits,
then the inevitable
conclusion is that it's going
to completely erode the
resource base until it implodes
or collapses.
So really, the
choice that we have
is to design and develop
an economy that operates
within ecological limits.
That's our only safe bet.
It's our only bet at all.
>> So if we think about the
whole problem of deflation
and what could happen
post-collapse in a country that
experiences a sudden reversal
and this loss of liquidity,
where the money supply really,
really gets chopped down,
people still have needs.
People still have
goods and services.
They're going to find a
way to exchange those.
What you want is the
easiest possible way
to make this happen.
And this is where alternative
currencies would plug the gap.
If a central government
were quick-thinking quick
off the mark and
actually had a plan
for dealing with
this stuff, they
could introduce a new currency,
maybe a parallel currency,
maybe a replacement currency
to counteract the disappearance
of all the bank money.
That probably won't
happen, though.
So it's going to be up to
local and regional currencies
to fill that void.
>> I woke up one morning and
jumped out of bed without even
being conscious yet, saying,
I'm going to start a local
currency.
And I just felt so much joy.
There was just this
energy moving through me.
LOAVES stands for Local Origin
Ashurst Voluntary Exchange
System.
It's one of those
acronyms that you
fit the words to the acronym
instead of the other way
around.
It is meant to be a
voucher system that
circulates in Ashurst
and the Pohangina Valley
as a voluntary alternative
to using money for exchange.
So LOAVES is primarily trading
at the Ashurst Community
Market, and we have about
a dozen or so businesses
that are accepting it there.
We've got the cheesery.
We've got the fudgery.
We have several
plant businesses.
We have a business
consultant who accepts it
outside of the market.
And there's half a dozen others
that are accepting it as well.
One of the primary benefits
of the currency in my mind
is the awareness raising
that goes along with it.
We're after not the currency
itself but the relationships
that come out of the currency.
So one of the major things
is this awareness campaign
around the benefits of buying
local, the benefits of having
a commitment between
customers and businesses,
of knowing what's available
in your own community,
of going to town
instead of the city
when you need something, of
supporting your neighbors
and looking to your neighbors
and their businesses
as a primary way of
meeting your needs.
>> The wealth generated by
using our local currency--
100% of it stays here.
There's no interest,
and it just keeps
circulating and recirculating
in the local community.
And rather than being
considered in competition
with the national money, it's
actually complementary to it.
>> So you strengthen
these local connections.
Of course, that's a
very resilient thing
to do because it just means
that if things are rough,
you've got friends, neighbors,
and people in your region that
are able to help
one another out.
Time banking is a very
interesting development
in that it uses a very
egalitarian basis.
It says everybody's
time is equal.
That doesn't matter
how skilled you are
or what your
qualifications are or what
you do for your day job,
that your hour is worth
the same as my hour.
>> I'm Maria Lee from Te Mahi
Kai at Diamond Harbour School,
which is a gardening
to cooking program.
So we teach the children how
to grow everything themselves.
And they put the seeds in
then look after the garden.
And then when it's my turn,
we harvest what they've
grown and turn it into lunch.
So today we're making kale
chips and broad bean dip.
And each week, it's different.
The idea is just to teach
them some basics of cooking.
And in order for that to work,
we use time bank volunteers.
And we couldn't do
it without them.
Our volunteers are
paid 1 credit per hour
that they come and
volunteer for us.
So we take those from the
school time bank credit system
and give it to them.
And then they use that to
trade for whatever they need.
>> It's always easier to build
your barn while the sun is
shining than try to put
it up in a howling gale.
So if you put these
things together now,
if you get a system up and
running, and especially
with something like
a local currency
where there may be some
marketing involved,
trying to get buy-in
from people and all
that-- you don't create one of
these things out of whole cloth
and get it widely
accepted overnight.
>> But there's no
getting away from it.
A huge part of this is that we
just consume too much stuff.
Our entire economy
is built on getting
us to buy and consume,
dispose, and re-consume things.
I don't think it's
realistic that we can expect
to live in a world where we
don't make things or use things
or use resources--
of course we do.
But we need to use them
in a way that is smart.
It's about intelligent use.
It's about being efficient
and not wasteful.
>> The notion of waste is
something that wasn't around
200 or 300 years ago.
We just didn't have waste.
Things had utility.
Things have value
all the way through.
And if they reached the
end of productivity,
they were know reformed
into something else.
Welcome to Bayswater
Repair Cafe.
A repair cafe is a
free pop-up event
where local community experts
in a variety of different areas
offer their skills and
services to other people
in their local
community for free.
Every year we send a
crazy amount of stuff
to holes in the ground.
And this is about
maybe doing something
to address some of
that flow, but also
in the process of doing that,
bringing people together
in a beautiful way
that connects people.
Create some networks and
maybe even some friendships.
So we've got five different
repair areas at the cafe today.
We've got our electrical
appliances repair space,
and that is overwhelmingly
the most popular area.
So people bring in toasters
and lamps and all kinds
of random bits and pieces.
We've got a clothing
repair space,
and we've got a team of
seamstresses and a seamster,
if that's the right word,
who are mending clothes.
We've got a guy who is repairing
wood and pieces of furniture.
And we've got general
repairs, and we've also
got two bike mechanics.
I was speaking to the daughter
of one of the volunteers who
helped out with repairs.
And he was an older guy.
And he said to her that he
felt a real sense of belonging
and a real sense of feeling
useful and having purpose.
And I thought that was an
amazing outcome from the day,
to make someone feel
good about having shared
their skills with local people.
This is a beautiful example
of a community initiative
that brings people together
and enhances connection,
enhances a sense of
community and neighborhood.
And we fix a lot of stuff.
But more important
than that, I think,
is the building of
connection and community.
>> It's really important to
remember that when you dispose
of something, you
can't throw it away.
When you throw something,
it goes somewhere.
You might not know
where that is.
It may be out of your sight,
may be out of your mind.
But there is no
such place as away.
>> In 2007, we were really
starting to think about
our impacts that we were having,
just our regular day-to-day
actions.
And one of the
things we focused on
was how much rubbish
we were producing.
We could have
focused on anything,
but rubbish was so visual.
And we're-- just every week
rubbish bags filling up.
And so we somehow decided
to challenge ourselves.
We can't even remember
whose idea it was now.
But we did this crazy thing
where we thought, right,
we're going to try and make no
rubbish for the entire year.
We were genuinely
not green people.
We were putting out a
bag of rubbish every week
without fail.
And we had literally never
thought about it before.
We sort of-- it came to us
one day and went, oh my gosh,
this is terrible.
>> In terms of the challenge
was to try and live for one year
with less than a city
council rubbish bag.
And most of it was
made up of items
that were out of our control.
So the radiator hose
on the car burst,
and so we had a radiator hose.
And we tried to carry on doing
things that you'd normally do.
So we were renovating
our home back then.
And we had all the lead paint
from scraping the weather
boards.
So in practical terms,
that's all we had left over.
I think when we look at the
average rubbish bin, what
people are putting out, at least
50% of it's generally organics.
And so you take the biggest
things out first, right?
So deal with organics
is the no-brainer.
If you do that, you're 50%
ahead of the average citizen.
And then there's another sort
of 30% of recyclable material
generally these days
in the rubbish bin.
So there's the next thing.
So you deal with the organics.
Then you recycle
everything you can.
And you're getting up
in-- by that stage,
you've made massive gains.
People can feel overwhelmed and
feel that what they're doing
doesn't make a difference.
But most of the waste we create
or we're kind of complicit in
is waste we've never seen.
So we'll buy
something, and there'll
be a bit of packaging
around it that we see.
But in making that item, that's
when the bulk of the waste
is created.
So if you're putting
out a rubbish bag,
it actually represents
70 rubbish bags of waste
that you've never
seen that has gone
into making that bag of waste.
Consumers have it tough, right?
A lot of money goes into
marketing and sending
the messages that you can buy
our compostable packaging,
and you're saving
the environment.
And of course, compostable
packaging in any landfill
is just as bad.
>> It's the sort of thing that
actually needs to be composted
at very hot temperatures, so
it really needs commercial
composting to be done properly.
And one of the biggest
problems in my business
that I have to go to
vendors and say, I'm sorry.
I know you've paid
more and you've
been promised that this is eco
and compostable by the person
that sold it to you.
But they didn't actually go and
do their product stewardship
and find out whether the
composting industry can take it
in every place.
>> I think we've actually
got consumers that want to do
the right thing.
We've got businesses that
are doing amazing stuff.
And we've got a government
completely missing
in action in terms of providing
a framework to encourage
those behaviors more and more.
>> So when you do buy a
container at the supermarket,
you make sure it's a
reusable container.
And then you wash it
out, and you take it
into one of these stores and
you get them to weigh it.
And then you fill it up
with whatever you want,
and they take the weight of it.
And you've just stopped
thick plastic packaging.
>> If people are combining
composting and learning how
to recycle and they're just
putting a bit of extra thought
into how they're shopping,
particularly considering that
packaging--
it's that choice when
you're at the supermarket
or at Bunnings or whatever,
thinking about the item,
essentially if it's plastic or
got other composite materials
in it.
What can you do with
it at the end of life?
Not much.
It's going to be rubbish.
It's going to be around
for thousands of years.
Every time we spend a
dollar, it's a vote.
We have so much
power, so much more
power than what we realize.
So it's like keep
on that knife edge.
Yes, see that it's a big--
yes, there's big issues.
But also yes, we can
make a difference.
>> There's part of me when
I go to recycle my bottles
or compost my waste, it's like,
well, what good does it do?
I know I'm just subtracting
one plastic bottle
from the enormous trash heap
that gets shipped to India
and is making new mountains
in India and China of waste.
Like, what does it matter,
one bottle different?
You can say, well,
if everybody did it,
then it would make a difference.
So you have to do your part.
But part of you will say,
well, I'm not everybody.
And if everybody does it, then
it doesn't matter if I do it.
So you have to have
another reason.
For me, it comes down to
relationship and ritual.
I like to save my compost
and use composting toilets,
for example, not because I've
done some calculation that this
is going to save the
world, but because it's
a different kind of relationship
with the beings around me.
>> Composting toilets, like
composting your own shit,
processing your
own toilet waste,
is a real basic fundamental
thing that we should all
practice.
It's a simple way
of demonstrating
self-responsibility.
>> So with a flush toilet,
basically you take really nice
clean drinking water and a
shit and mix the two together,
both wonderful resources.
When you mix them together,
you create a toxic problem.
So with a compost
toilet system, you're
able to capture that amazing
resource and take care of it
and treat it in a way
that removes any pathogens
or problems and create
a wonderful resource.
>> OK, so welcome to our toilet.
For a start, it's a composting
toilet bucket bench system.
We've got cover
material which we
use old sawdust from the mill.
It's already got bacteria
and bit of fungus in it.
So you go make your deposit,
put a bit of cover material
on, leave it.
And then when we've got a
certain amount of buckets,
we go to the compost and
add straw and garden waste
and kitchen waste.
And this is one I
did maybe a week ago.
And we'll put the compost
thermometer in here
and see what we're looking at.
We're still looking
at 50 degrees.
It's going up.
It got up to 65
degrees the other day.
I recorded it a bit.
>> There are pathogens
you have to consider.
There's roundworm eggs and
all these different kinds
of worm eggs that can
exist in your manure.
But if you do a hot compost,
that's the safest way.
Because you can nuke all
those things within hours.
>> And over here
is what you get.
I put it in a bag,
but you don't need to.
That there is about a year old.
It's got lots of worms in it.
We put all our garden waste and
all our kitchen waste in here.
But the worms are a good sign.
If you've got worms, it means
it's not too acidic and mm,
yum, good stuff.
And that goes straight on the
garden, and the plants love it.
And we love the plants.
>> When it's
finished composting,
it doesn't look like or
smell like anything like poo.
It's just beautiful
black compost.
So we've monitored it closely.
We've watched the temperature.
We know all the pathogens
have been nuked.
We feel confident
in our process.
So we feel safe to
use it in our garden.
Anyone can do this.
It's just really a matter of
being engaged and wanting to do
it and getting the knowledge.
It's a knowledge-based system.
It's not technological or
anything really advanced.
I've seen people do it
in cities with a wee
backyard, small backyard, yeah.
And I've seen people do it
in really rural settings.
It's just a matter
of being engaged.
>> Yeah, it's for everyone,
everyone who wants to take more
responsibility for themselves
and not pass it off,
everyone who values their poo.
[LAUGHS] I value my poo.
I value your poo to, so
you're welcome to leave
a deposit before you go.
It's sort of expected
actually, no pressure.
[LAUGHS]
>> We've come to see
that in order to be part
of the solution, we really need
to use our everyday choices
to change our behavior.
And it's a cultural
shift that needs
to happen in order for us to at
least sustain ourselves, which
isn't even enough
of course because,
what are we sustaining?
And so that's
something I've really
been putting a lot
of time into recently
is designing my work so that
it's actually regenerative.
Sort of out of necessity I
started this organic waste
collection.
Check this out, whoa!
Here we're currently
picking about 2 and 1/2 tons
up each week from
local businesses.
And instead of that all going
into a hole in the ground,
it gets returned
back to the soil
by way of windrow
aerobic composting.
So we currently have
around 45 businesses
on the Why Waste collection.
And they have a number of bins
or buckets, mostly wheelie
bins, and some have up to five
wheelie bins at their business.
And every week Why Waste
comes and picks it up,
and we take it to--
we weigh it, we record all
the data, things like that.
We take it to a
composting facility.
And so yeah, we're in
partnership with them
so that we can return that
waste back to the soil.
Recently, one of my
clients rang me up.
And they were super
stoked because they
were able to cancel
this big, like, skip bin
for their rubbish.
And now they just use a
240-liter wheelie bin,
which is much, much smaller.
And that's as a result of all
of their compostable waste
going back to the soil.
Oh, what's that?
Oh, a tasty muffin!
[LAUGHS]
I'm really passionate
about composting
as a solution of
minimizing our waste
and our impact here on this
one planet that we have.
Food scraps and
biodegradable waste
takes up over a third of
what we send to landfill.
When biodegradable matter
biodegrades anaerobically,
it produces a lot
of methane, which
is 23 times worse than carbon
dioxide as a greenhouse gas.
And not only do you get that
gas going into the atmosphere,
but you also get
a liquid version
of it leaching into our
soils, into our water table.
So what we're trying
to achieve here
is build a really hot
compost around this drum
and also all of this--
build all this
irrigation into it
so that when that aerobic
hot compost heats up,
we should be able to pump
water through the system
out and over to these
bathtubs over here
and have free
biologically-heated hot water.
The reason why I'm so
enthusiastic about compost
is that it's fertility
in its purest form.
This is how nature
builds soil, and that
enables us to grow more food.
And if people are
conscious of composting,
they're probably going to
become more conscious about what
they're eating.
And if they're
opening less packets,
that's good for everyone.
That's good for the planet.
It's good for our people.
If we can get people to
focus on eating better,
then we're actually able to
produce a lot less landfill
waste and a lot more
biodegradable waste, which
then can be turned into more
fertility to produce more food.
So the healthier we eat, the
better our waste is and much
easier to manage and
return to the land.
People talk about thinking
global, acting local.
I suppose I'm really sitting
in that truth presently.
I'd rather think
global and act global,
but we've got to start
somewhere, you know?
And so yeah, that's
the change that I'm
wanting to see in the world.
So I'm being it the best I can.
[OCEAN WAVES]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> I see a lot of people
who are very sensitive
to the devastation, the
damage, or just civilization.
And it paralyzes them.
And that's sad because
we need those people, all
of those people.
Do you know there's lots of
things that could depress you
out in the world?
But if you take
each negative act,
there's almost like an
opportunity or provocation
to do your thing, which
is the opposite of that.
Give more life.
Then it's fun.
Then it's a winnable game.
That's how I see it.
>> It would be awesome to
see our country before human
contact--
you know, the
thousands and thousands
and millions of birds,
huge, huge coni trees.
It's just unimaginable.
I think we all have
done a misjustice
to looking after Papatuanuku.
My ancestors weren't
always exactly the best
conservationists
either, but we now
have a chance to revive and
recover those landscapes
before it's too late.
>> Over a three-year period,
we planted 85,000 trees.
And the majority of those
are New Zealand native trees
which are now flourishing
and really transforming
the landscape.
I just sort of would love to
see what this place looked
like 1,000 years ago, which
is such a brief period
in ecological time.
And in that time,
we've sort of stripped
most of the native vegetation
and done a whole lot of damage.
And we've gone about as far
as we can down that road.
And so now it's time for us
to try and find the balance
and restore those ecosystems
but find a place for humans
living harmoniously within it.
>> You don't realize this,
but this used to be pastoral
desert.
>> It was just grass.
>> Yeah.
And this is what people can do.
You can create heaven on earth.
>> Start growing food.
Food is central to
the way we live,
our health, and our whole
ecosystem environment.
Even if you're in an
apartment, you can--
windows sills, pots, whatever.
You can start, and
that's the first step.
Once you engage with growing
and experiencing nature,
then things start to happen.
>> I get asked this a lot.
What can somebody do if they're
not a farmer or on the land?
What can they do to change it?
Well, they can do a lot.
The best thing
that anybody can do
is to vote with their wallets.
While in some cases, it
may be more expensive,
do what you can.
If you see people
in your area that
are producing food that
is ecologically healthy,
they're doing it
in a way that is
looking after the environment,
then that adds up.
The more people that do
that, the less expensive
it will become as that
becomes normalized.
>> From an individual's
point of view,
the biggest change by far that
we can achieve by changing
our own lifestyle is to reduce
the amount of meat we eat.
That will have a
much bigger effect
than what we do transport-wise
or almost anything else.
>> There's a lovely poem that
talks about we don't have to be
good.
We don't have to walk 100
miles on our knees repenting
in the desert.
We just have to do what the
soft animal of our body loves,
and I really like that.
I really like that.
For me, this turns
out to be what I love.
And I have a suspicion that
this is actually the blueprint.
And there's something
when people get to it,
everybody would want to
live this way I suspect.
But it might be a really
long journey for some folks
to get to that knowing.
>> Last year I made a submission
to a council, long-term plan,
that I thought climate change
was by far the most urgent
and important issue that council
should be concerned about.
And they said, and what
would that look like?
I got a reaction.
So I ruminated on
it for a while,
and I took it back
to a group that I
was part of called
Project Wairarapa
And they said,
yes, let's do this.
You should have heard the
buzz at that first meeting.
It was fantastic.
And that feeds me.
That encourages me that
I'm doing something useful.
It's my time to give back
to the community that's
been so good to me,
where I've raised my kids
and had such a good life.
>> So my vision for the future--
I have to be really clear.
It doesn't have anything
to do with things
working the way they do now
but with renewable energy.
That's actually
not a possibility.
Working on renewable energy
and being quite different
from what we do now,
evolving into something else
is the vision I see.
Now, how well
that's all working,
how high a quality of life
that is, how fair it is,
how equitable it is, how
stable the governments are,
how much war has come between
now and then completely
depends on what we do right now.
>> I think that the place that
we're going is a place that we
cannot see from where we are.
It'll only emerge or become
visible as we move toward it.
So I'm not going
to say, OK, here's
the blueprint for
the future system.
I've thought it all
out, and now I'm
going to tell you what it is.
But I do catch
glimpses sometimes.
One thing that comes to
me is that in the future
we'll feel really at
home in the world.
We will be intimately familiar
with the landscape around us.
We will be in rich communities.
The best experiences you've
had in your life, the most
authentic, the most vibrant--
those don't have
to be exceptions.
Trust what feels loving.
Trust what feels good.
Trust what feels aligned
with who you really are.
If you live by that and spread
that vibe and other people
start living by that,
then the whole planet
is going to change.
[MUSIC PLAYING]